# What is O11y?

"observability is a measure of how well internal states of a system can be inferred from knowledge of its external outputs."
In other words: monitoring and observing applications

# Why?

Modern applications are getting more are more complex. The majority of them run in cloud where engineers can lack complete control of the infrstructure. O11y enables engineers to know the state of an application in production and the underlying infrastructure health as well as to debug and find the root causes of problems.

# Metrics

Metrics are numeric representations of data. In other words:  point-in-time observations of the state of a system. Eg. temperature, counter of HTTP requests observed on the webserver.

The “heap-memory-bytes” would allow us to view the heap memory usage of each host over time. We could also perform additional aggregations on top, e.g. the average heap memory usage per data center.

| Metric name       | Label key | Label value | Label key   | Label Value | Value at time t0 | .. at t1 |
|-------------------|-----------|-------------|-------------|-------------|------------------|----------|
| heap-memory-bytes | host      | host123     | data-center | c1          | 11231            | 11200    |
| heap-memory-bytes | host      | host234     | data-center | c1          | 300203           | 412103   |

## Gauge

Metric representing a single numerical value that can arbitrarily go up and down: temperatures or current memory usage, the number of concurrent requests.

## Counter

Cumulative metric representing a single monotonically increasing counter whose value can only increase or be reset to zero on restart: number of requests served, tasks completed, or errors.

## Histogram

The histogram samples observations (like request durations or response sizes) and counts them in configurable or exponential buckets: percentiles.

# Logs

Logs are one or more textual entries describing usage patterns, activities, and operations within an operating system, application, server, or another device.

# Traces

Distributed tracing is the technique of understanding what happened during a distributed transaction, such as a request initiated by an end-user and its effects across all downstream microservices and data stores that were touched as a result.

The key mechanism to persist the relationship across different actors is context propagation.

# Profiles

Continuously collecting profiles allows us to drill down and see why a particular system is experiencing such problems.

Profiling lets you drill even deeper and understand why those latency issues exist. Furthermore, it helps you understand which parts of the code use the most server resources.



-  CPU Profilers
-  Heap Profilers
-  GPU Profilers
-  Mutex profilers
-  IO profilers
-  Language-specific profilers (e.g. Go pprof, JVM Profiler, and the pprof support currently being added to Java)

# Challenges

- Decide what is important to monitor
- Metric cardinality: (eg include PID label in "heap-memory-bytes" metrics result in more rows)

# Resources

- [Observability Whitepaper](https://github.com/cncf/tag-observability/blob/whitepaper-v1.0.0/whitepaper.md)
